doc/source/addons.rst, before:

Developing OpenERP Web Addons
=============================

An OpenERP Web addon is simply a Python package with an openerp
descriptor (a ``__openerp__.py`` file) which follows a few structural
and namespacing rules.

Structure
---------

.. literalinclude:: addon-structure.txt

``__openerp__.py``
  The addon's descriptor, contains the following information:

  ``name: str``
    The addon name, in plain, readable english
  ``version: str``
    The addon version, following `Semantic Versioning`_ rules
  ``depends: [str]``
    A list of addons this addon needs to work correctly. ``base`` is
    an implied dependency if the list is empty.
  ``css: [str]``
    An ordered list of CSS files this addon provides and needs. The
    file paths are relative to the addon's root. Because the Web
    Client *may* perform concatenations and other various
    optimizations on CSS files, the order is important.
  ``js: [str]``
    An ordered list of Javascript files this addon provides and needs
    (including dependencies files). As with CSS files, the order is
    important as the Web Client *may* perform contatenations and
    minimizations of files.
  ``active: bool``
    Whether this addon should be enabled by default any time it is
    found, or whether it will be enabled through other means (on a
    by-need or by-installation basis for instance).

``controllers/``
  All of the Python controllers and JSON-RPC endpoints.

``static/``
  The static files directory, may be served via a separate web server.

``static/lib/``
  Third-party libraries used by the addon.

``static/src/{css,js,img,xml}``
  Location for (respectively) the addon's static CSS files, its JS
  files, its various image resources as well as the template files

``static/test``
  Javascript tests files

``test/``
  The directories in which all tests for the addon are located.

Some of these are guidelines (and not enforced by code), but it's
suggested that these be followed. Code which does not fit into these
categories can go wherever deemed suitable.

Namespacing
-----------

Python
++++++

Because addons are also Python packages, they're inherently namespaced
and nothing special needs to be done on that front.

JavaScript
++++++++++

The JavaScript side of an addon has to live in the namespace
``openerp.$addon_name``. For instance, everything created by the addon
``base`` lives in ``openerp.base``.

The root namespace of the addon is a function which takes a single
parameter ``openerp``, which is an OpenERP client instance. Objects
(as well as functions, registry instances, etc...) should be added on
the correct namespace on that object.

The root function will be called by the OpenERP Web client when
initializing the addon.

.. code-block:: javascript

    // root namespace of the openerp.example addon
    /** @namespace */
    openerp.example = function (openerp) {
        // basic initialization code (e.g. templates loading)
        openerp.example.SomeClass = Class.extend(
            /** @lends openerp.example.SomeClass# */{
            /**
             * Description for SomeClass's constructor here
             *
             * @constructs
             */
            init: function () {
                // SomeClass initialization code
            }
            // rest of SomeClass
        });

        // access an object in an other addon namespace to replace it
        openerp.base.SearchView = openerp.base.SearchView.extend({
            init: function () {
                this._super.apply(this, arguments);
                console.log('Search view initialized');
            }
        });
    }

.. _addons-testing:

Testing
-------

Python
++++++

OpenERP Web uses unittest2_ for its testing needs. We selected
unittest2 rather than unittest_ for the following reasons:

* autodiscovery_ (similar to nose, via the ``unit2``
  CLI utility) and `pluggable test discovery`_.

* `new and improved assertions`_ (with improvements in type-specific
  inequality reportings) including `pluggable custom types equality
  assertions`_

* neveral new APIs, most notably `assertRaises context manager`_,
  `cleanup function registration`_, `test skipping`_ and `class- and
  module-level setup and teardown`_

* finally, unittest2 is a backport of Python 3's unittest. We might as
  well get used to it.

To run tests on addons (from the root directory of OpenERP Web) is as
simple as typing ``PYTHONPATH=. unit2 discover -s addons`` [#]_. To
test an addon which does not live in the ``addons`` directory, simply
replace ``addons`` by the directory in which your own addon lives.

.. note:: unittest2 is entirely compatible with nose_ (or the
     other way around). If you want to use nose as your test
     runner (due to its addons for instance) you can simply install it
     and run ``nosetests addons`` instead of the ``unit2`` command,
     the result should be exactly the same.

APIs
----

Javascript
++++++++++

.. js:class:: openerp.base.Widget(view, node)

    :param openerp.base.Controller view: The view to which the widget belongs
    :param Object node: the ``fields_view_get`` descriptor for the widget

    .. js:attribute:: $element

        The widget's root element as jQuery object

.. js:class:: openerp.base.DataSet(session, model)

    :param openerp.base.Session session: the RPC session object
    :param String model: the model managed by this dataset

    The DataSet is the abstraction for a sequence of records stored in
    database.

    It provides interfaces for reading records based on search
    criteria, and for selecting and fetching records based on
    activated ids.

    .. js:function:: fetch([offset][, limit])

       :param Number offset: the index from which records should start
                             being returned (section)
       :param Number limit: the maximum number of records to return
       :returns: the dataset instance it was called on

       Asynchronously fetches the records selected by the DataSet's
       domain and context, in the provided sort order if any.

       Only fetches the fields selected by the DataSet.

       On success, triggers :js:func:`on_fetch`

    .. js:function:: on_fetch(records, event)

        :param Array records: an array of
                             :js:class:`openerp.base.DataRecord`
                             matching the DataSet's selection
        :param event: a data holder letting the event handler fetch
                     meta-informations about the event.
        :type event: OnFetchEvent

        Fired after :js:func:`fetch` is done fetching the records
        selected by the DataSet.

    .. js:function:: active_ids

        :returns: the dataset instance it was called on

        Asynchronously fetches the active records for this DataSet.

        On success, triggers :js:func:`on_active_ids`

    .. js:function:: on_active_ids(records)

        :param Array records: an array of
                              :js:class:`openerp.base.DataRecord`
                              matching the currently active ids

        Fired after :js:func:`active_ids` fetched the records matching
        the DataSet's active ids.

    .. js:function:: active_id

        :returns: the dataset instance in was called on

        Asynchronously fetches the current active record.

        On success, triggers :js:func:`on_active_id`

    .. js:function:: on_active_id(record)

        :param Object record: the record fetched by
                              :js:func:`active_id`, or ``null``
        :type record: openerp.base.DataRecord

        Fired after :js:func:`active_id` fetched the record matching
        the dataset's active id

    .. js:function:: set(options)

        :param Object options: the options to set on the dataset
        :type options: DataSetOptions
        :returns: the dataset instance it was called on

        Configures the data set by setting various properties on it

    .. js:function:: prev

        :returns: the dataset instance it was called on

        Activates the id preceding the current one in the active ids
        sequence of the dataset.

        If the current active id is at the start of the sequence,
        wraps back to the last id of the sequence.

    .. js:function:: next

        :returns: the dataset instance it was called on

        Activates the id following the current one in the active ids
        sequence.

        If the current active id is the last of the sequence, wraps
        back to the beginning of the active ids sequence.

    .. js:function:: select(ids)

        :param Array ids: the identifiers to activate on the dataset
        :returns: the dataset instance it was called on

        Activates all the ids specified in the dataset, resets the
        current active id to be the first id of the new sequence.

        The internal order will be the same as the ids list provided.

    .. js:function:: get_active_ids

        :returns: the list of current active ids for the dataset

    .. js:function:: activate(id)

        :param Number id: the id to activate
        :returns: the dataset instance it was called on

        Activates the id provided in the dataset. If no ids are
        selected, selects the id in the dataset.

        If ids are already selected and the provided id is not in that
        selection, raises an error.

    .. js:function:: get_active_id

        :returns: the dataset's current active id

.. js:class:: openerp.base.DataRecord(session, model, fields, values)

Ad-hoc objects and structural types
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

These objects are not associated with any specific class, they're
generally literal objects created on the spot. Names are merely
convenient ways to refer to them and their properties.

.. js:class:: OnFetchEvent

    .. js:attribute:: context

        The context used for the :js:func:`fetch` call (domain set on
        the :js:class:`openerp.base.DataSet` when ``fetch`` was
        called)

    .. js:attribute:: domain

        The domain used for the :js:func:`fetch` call

    .. js:attribute:: limit

        The limit with which the original :js:func:`fetch` call was
        performed

    .. js:attribute:: offset

        The offset with which the original :js:func:`fetch` call was
        performed

    .. js:attribute:: sort

       The sorting criteria active on the
       :js:class:`openerp.base.DataSet` when :js:func:`fetch` was
       called

.. js:class:: DataSetOptions

    .. js:attribute:: context

    .. js:attribute:: domain

    .. js:attribute:: sort

Python
++++++

.. autoclass:: openerpweb.openerpweb.OpenERPSession
    :members:

.. autoclass:: openerpweb.openerpweb.OpenERPModel
    :members:

* Addons lifecycle (loading, execution, events, ...)

  * Python-side
  * JS-side

* Handling static files
* Overridding a Python controller (object?)
* Overridding a Javascript controller (object?)
* Extending templates
  .. how do you handle deploying static files via e.g. a separate lighttpd?
* Python public APIs
* QWeb templates description?
* OpenERP Web modules (from OpenERP modules)

.. [#] the ``-s`` parameter tells ``unit2`` to start trying to
       find tests in the provided directory (here we're testing
       addons). However a side-effect of that is to set the
       ``PYTHONPATH`` there as well, so it will fail to find (and
       import) ``openerpweb``.

       The ``-t`` parameter lets us set the ``PYTHONPATH``
       independently, but it doesn't accept multiple values and here
       we really want to have both ``.`` and ``addons`` on the
       ``PYTHONPATH``.

       The solution is to set the ``PYTHONPATH`` to ``.`` on start,
       and the ``start-directory`` to ``addons``. This results in a
       correct ``PYTHONPATH`` within ``unit2``.

.. _unittest:
    http://docs.python.org/library/unittest.html

.. _unittest2:
    http://www.voidspace.org.uk/python/articles/unittest2.shtml

.. _autodiscovery:
    http://www.voidspace.org.uk/python/articles/unittest2.shtml#test-discovery

.. _pluggable test discovery:
    http://www.voidspace.org.uk/python/articles/unittest2.shtml#load-tests

.. _new and improved assertions:
    http://www.voidspace.org.uk/python/articles/unittest2.shtml#new-assert-methods

.. _pluggable custom types equality assertions:
    http://www.voidspace.org.uk/python/articles/unittest2.shtml#add-new-type-specific-functions

.. _assertRaises context manager:
    http://www.voidspace.org.uk/python/articles/unittest2.shtml#assertraises

.. _cleanup function registration:
    http://www.voidspace.org.uk/python/articles/unittest2.shtml#cleanup-functions-with-addcleanup

.. _test skipping:
    http://www.voidspace.org.uk/python/articles/unittest2.shtml#test-skipping

.. _class- and module-level setup and teardown:
    http://www.voidspace.org.uk/python/articles/unittest2.shtml#class-and-module-level-fixtures

.. _Semantic Versioning:
    http://semver.org/

.. _nose:
    http://somethingaboutorange.com/mrl/projects/nose/1.0.0/

Commit message:

[IMP] document automatic binding of do_ and on_ methods of BasicController subclasses
bzr revid: xmo@openerp.com-20110413140735-hc8nbxxos4yl11xj

doc/source/addons.rst, after:

Developing OpenERP Web Addons
=============================

An OpenERP Web addon is simply a Python package with an openerp
descriptor (a ``__openerp__.py`` file) which follows a few structural
and namespacing rules.

Structure
---------

.. literalinclude:: addon-structure.txt

``__openerp__.py``
  The addon's descriptor, contains the following information:

  ``name: str``
    The addon name, in plain, readable english
  ``version: str``
    The addon version, following `Semantic Versioning`_ rules
  ``depends: [str]``
    A list of addons this addon needs to work correctly. ``base`` is
    an implied dependency if the list is empty.
  ``css: [str]``
    An ordered list of CSS files this addon provides and needs. The
    file paths are relative to the addon's root. Because the Web
    Client *may* perform concatenations and other various
    optimizations on CSS files, the order is important.
  ``js: [str]``
    An ordered list of Javascript files this addon provides and needs
    (including dependencies files). As with CSS files, the order is
    important as the Web Client *may* perform contatenations and
    minimizations of files.
  ``active: bool``
    Whether this addon should be enabled by default any time it is
    found, or whether it will be enabled through other means (on a
    by-need or by-installation basis for instance).

``controllers/``
  All of the Python controllers and JSON-RPC endpoints.

``static/``
  The static files directory, may be served via a separate web server.

``static/lib/``
  Third-party libraries used by the addon.

``static/src/{css,js,img,xml}``
  Location for (respectively) the addon's static CSS files, its JS
  files, its various image resources as well as the template files

``static/test``
  Javascript tests files

``test/``
  The directories in which all tests for the addon are located.

Some of these are guidelines (and not enforced by code), but it's
suggested that these be followed. Code which does not fit into these
categories can go wherever deemed suitable.

Namespacing
-----------

Python
++++++

Because addons are also Python packages, they're inherently namespaced
and nothing special needs to be done on that front.

JavaScript
++++++++++

The JavaScript side of an addon has to live in the namespace
``openerp.$addon_name``. For instance, everything created by the addon
``base`` lives in ``openerp.base``.

The root namespace of the addon is a function which takes a single
parameter ``openerp``, which is an OpenERP client instance. Objects
(as well as functions, registry instances, etc...) should be added on
the correct namespace on that object.

The root function will be called by the OpenERP Web client when
initializing the addon.

.. code-block:: javascript

    // root namespace of the openerp.example addon
    /** @namespace */
    openerp.example = function (openerp) {
        // basic initialization code (e.g. templates loading)
        openerp.example.SomeClass = Class.extend(
            /** @lends openerp.example.SomeClass# */{
            /**
             * Description for SomeClass's constructor here
             *
             * @constructs
             */
            init: function () {
                // SomeClass initialization code
            }
            // rest of SomeClass
        });

        // access an object in an other addon namespace to replace it
        openerp.base.SearchView = openerp.base.SearchView.extend({
            init: function () {
                this._super.apply(this, arguments);
                console.log('Search view initialized');
            }
        });
    }

Utility behaviors
-----------------

JavaScript
++++++++++

* All javascript objects inheriting from
  :js:class:`openerp.base.BasicConroller` will have all methods
  starting with ``on_`` or ``do_`` bound to their ``this``. This means
  they don't have to be manually bound (via ``_.bind`` or ``$.proxy``)
  in order to be useable as bound event handlers (event handlers
  keeping their object as ``this`` rather than taking whatever
  ``this`` object they were called with).

  Beware that this is only valid for methods starting with ``do_`` and
  ``on_``, any other method will have to be bound manually.

.. _addons-testing:

Testing
-------

Python
++++++

OpenERP Web uses unittest2_ for its testing needs. We selected
unittest2 rather than unittest_ for the following reasons:

* autodiscovery_ (similar to nose, via the ``unit2``
  CLI utility) and `pluggable test discovery`_.

* `new and improved assertions`_ (with improvements in type-specific
  inequality reportings) including `pluggable custom types equality
  assertions`_

* neveral new APIs, most notably `assertRaises context manager`_,
  `cleanup function registration`_, `test skipping`_ and `class- and
  module-level setup and teardown`_

* finally, unittest2 is a backport of Python 3's unittest. We might as
  well get used to it.

To run tests on addons (from the root directory of OpenERP Web) is as
simple as typing ``PYTHONPATH=. unit2 discover -s addons`` [#]_. To
test an addon which does not live in the ``addons`` directory, simply
replace ``addons`` by the directory in which your own addon lives.

.. note:: unittest2 is entirely compatible with nose_ (or the
     other way around). If you want to use nose as your test
     runner (due to its addons for instance) you can simply install it
     and run ``nosetests addons`` instead of the ``unit2`` command,
     the result should be exactly the same.

APIs
----

Javascript
++++++++++

.. js:class:: openerp.base.Widget(view, node)

    :param openerp.base.Controller view: The view to which the widget belongs
    :param Object node: the ``fields_view_get`` descriptor for the widget

    .. js:attribute:: $element

        The widget's root element as jQuery object

.. js:class:: openerp.base.DataSet(session, model)

    :param openerp.base.Session session: the RPC session object
    :param String model: the model managed by this dataset

    The DataSet is the abstraction for a sequence of records stored in
    database.

    It provides interfaces for reading records based on search
    criteria, and for selecting and fetching records based on
    activated ids.

    .. js:function:: fetch([offset][, limit])

       :param Number offset: the index from which records should start
                             being returned (section)
       :param Number limit: the maximum number of records to return
       :returns: the dataset instance it was called on

       Asynchronously fetches the records selected by the DataSet's
       domain and context, in the provided sort order if any.

       Only fetches the fields selected by the DataSet.

       On success, triggers :js:func:`on_fetch`

    .. js:function:: on_fetch(records, event)

        :param Array records: an array of
                             :js:class:`openerp.base.DataRecord`
                             matching the DataSet's selection
        :param event: a data holder letting the event handler fetch
                     meta-informations about the event.
        :type event: OnFetchEvent

        Fired after :js:func:`fetch` is done fetching the records
        selected by the DataSet.

    .. js:function:: active_ids

        :returns: the dataset instance it was called on

        Asynchronously fetches the active records for this DataSet.

        On success, triggers :js:func:`on_active_ids`

    .. js:function:: on_active_ids(records)

        :param Array records: an array of
                              :js:class:`openerp.base.DataRecord`
                              matching the currently active ids

        Fired after :js:func:`active_ids` fetched the records matching
        the DataSet's active ids.

    .. js:function:: active_id

        :returns: the dataset instance in was called on

        Asynchronously fetches the current active record.

        On success, triggers :js:func:`on_active_id`

    .. js:function:: on_active_id(record)

        :param Object record: the record fetched by
                              :js:func:`active_id`, or ``null``
        :type record: openerp.base.DataRecord

        Fired after :js:func:`active_id` fetched the record matching
        the dataset's active id

    .. js:function:: set(options)

        :param Object options: the options to set on the dataset
        :type options: DataSetOptions
        :returns: the dataset instance it was called on

        Configures the data set by setting various properties on it

    .. js:function:: prev

        :returns: the dataset instance it was called on

        Activates the id preceding the current one in the active ids
        sequence of the dataset.

        If the current active id is at the start of the sequence,
        wraps back to the last id of the sequence.

    .. js:function:: next

        :returns: the dataset instance it was called on

        Activates the id following the current one in the active ids
        sequence.

        If the current active id is the last of the sequence, wraps
        back to the beginning of the active ids sequence.

    .. js:function:: select(ids)

        :param Array ids: the identifiers to activate on the dataset
        :returns: the dataset instance it was called on

        Activates all the ids specified in the dataset, resets the
        current active id to be the first id of the new sequence.

        The internal order will be the same as the ids list provided.

    .. js:function:: get_active_ids

        :returns: the list of current active ids for the dataset

    .. js:function:: activate(id)

        :param Number id: the id to activate
        :returns: the dataset instance it was called on

        Activates the id provided in the dataset. If no ids are
        selected, selects the id in the dataset.

        If ids are already selected and the provided id is not in that
        selection, raises an error.

    .. js:function:: get_active_id

        :returns: the dataset's current active id

.. js:class:: openerp.base.DataRecord(session, model, fields, values)

Ad-hoc objects and structural types
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

These objects are not associated with any specific class, they're
generally literal objects created on the spot. Names are merely
convenient ways to refer to them and their properties.

.. js:class:: OnFetchEvent

    .. js:attribute:: context

        The context used for the :js:func:`fetch` call (domain set on
        the :js:class:`openerp.base.DataSet` when ``fetch`` was
        called)

    .. js:attribute:: domain

        The domain used for the :js:func:`fetch` call

    .. js:attribute:: limit

        The limit with which the original :js:func:`fetch` call was
        performed

    .. js:attribute:: offset

        The offset with which the original :js:func:`fetch` call was
        performed

    .. js:attribute:: sort

       The sorting criteria active on the
       :js:class:`openerp.base.DataSet` when :js:func:`fetch` was
       called

.. js:class:: DataSetOptions

    .. js:attribute:: context

    .. js:attribute:: domain

    .. js:attribute:: sort

Python
++++++

.. autoclass:: openerpweb.openerpweb.OpenERPSession
    :members:

.. autoclass:: openerpweb.openerpweb.OpenERPModel
    :members:

* Addons lifecycle (loading, execution, events, ...)

  * Python-side
  * JS-side

* Handling static files
* Overridding a Python controller (object?)
* Overridding a Javascript controller (object?)
* Extending templates
  .. how do you handle deploying static files via e.g. a separate lighttpd?
* Python public APIs
* QWeb templates description?
* OpenERP Web modules (from OpenERP modules)

.. [#] the ``-s`` parameter tells ``unit2`` to start trying to
       find tests in the provided directory (here we're testing
       addons). However a side-effect of that is to set the
       ``PYTHONPATH`` there as well, so it will fail to find (and
       import) ``openerpweb``.

       The ``-t`` parameter lets us set the ``PYTHONPATH``
       independently, but it doesn't accept multiple values and here
       we really want to have both ``.`` and ``addons`` on the
       ``PYTHONPATH``.

       The solution is to set the ``PYTHONPATH`` to ``.`` on start,
       and the ``start-directory`` to ``addons``. This results in a
       correct ``PYTHONPATH`` within ``unit2``.

.. _unittest:
    http://docs.python.org/library/unittest.html

.. _unittest2:
    http://www.voidspace.org.uk/python/articles/unittest2.shtml

.. _autodiscovery:
    http://www.voidspace.org.uk/python/articles/unittest2.shtml#test-discovery

.. _pluggable test discovery:
    http://www.voidspace.org.uk/python/articles/unittest2.shtml#load-tests

.. _new and improved assertions:
    http://www.voidspace.org.uk/python/articles/unittest2.shtml#new-assert-methods

.. _pluggable custom types equality assertions:
    http://www.voidspace.org.uk/python/articles/unittest2.shtml#add-new-type-specific-functions

.. _assertRaises context manager:
    http://www.voidspace.org.uk/python/articles/unittest2.shtml#assertraises

.. _cleanup function registration:
    http://www.voidspace.org.uk/python/articles/unittest2.shtml#cleanup-functions-with-addcleanup

.. _test skipping:
    http://www.voidspace.org.uk/python/articles/unittest2.shtml#test-skipping

.. _class- and module-level setup and teardown:
    http://www.voidspace.org.uk/python/articles/unittest2.shtml#class-and-module-level-fixtures

.. _Semantic Versioning:
    http://semver.org/

.. _nose:
    http://somethingaboutorange.com/mrl/projects/nose/1.0.0/
